---
title: "On Leaving"
date: 2021-09-30
author: Ryan Cordell
permalink: /research/on-leaving/
layout: post
---

As I wrote [in my last post](https://ryancordell.org/research/why-iSchool/), "The primary reason I decided to joined the faculty at UIUC's School of Information Sciences was the incredible colleagues I would have the chance to work with" and, secondly, "the chance to work with students in a richly interdisciplinary department—students whose work perhaps sits somewhat awkwardly across academic departments, as mine does." Overall, I want to stay focused on the positive reasons for my move, and I have debated whether to write anything publicly about more difficult motivations. However, [this recent Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/benmschmidt/status/1442913179286179840?s=20) and [interactive visualization](https://observablehq.com/@bmschmidt/aha-job-listings) from Ben Schmidt—a former office neighbor when we were both at Northeastern—prompt me to finally sit down and write a post I've been ruminating for months. The central idea of this post will be: I found it increasingly untenable, particularly after three years as graduate program director, to recruit, train, and mentor graduate students for a field that, practically speaking, has no job market. I found myself working on behalf of systems that, however noble in the ideal, were in practice—at least to me—unethical.

And yes, I know it's more complicated than that. I know humanities students have many and diverse motivations for graduate school, and many and diverse goals for what follows graduate school. I know that colleagues around the country are undertaking enormous labor to reimagine those systems and create more just outcomes. I am not writing to erase those motivations or outcomes, or deny the incredible things that humanities MAs and PhDs do in the world. I only want to speak about my experiences in a role ostensibly helping to build a field, while that field disintegrated around me.

I'm nervous about posting what follows for three main reasons:

1. These reflections will necessarily invoke—though never specifically—colleagues at my former institution, who I do not want to impugn or hurt. While my immediate frame of reference will of course be department(s) where I have worked, I do not think I'm describing only or even primarily those departments. My comments come also from a broader sense of the field gleaned at conferences, through service for national organizations, and from conversations with colleagues around the country. Even more importantly—as I hope this post will show—there are larger administrative and economic forces that stymie even the best-intended departments in this moment. Much like climate change, the issues are systemic, and no one scholar or even department can do much through their individual choices to alter them. 
2. I've read enough posts and subsequent social-media debates around the question of grad school and the job market—and have been reading them for long enough—to know that many people's experience will vary markedly from anything I describe. I have heard many first-generation grad students, for example, describe how going to graduate school was often the most stable employment decision they could make in the moment they made it. I do not want to erase those realities and have sought to temper my comments accordingly in this post. 
3. At my core, the most idealistic defenses of humanities programs resonate with me, strongly. I firmly believe that we need lots of people—and especially younger people—researching and teaching—or even just excited to talk about—history and literature and philosophy and art. As I wrote in [an older post about the novel _Station Eleven_](https://ryancordell.org/personal/because-survival-is-insufficient/), mere "survival is insufficent." We need thriving arts and humanities for the health not just of the academy, but of society. I would not have made this move if I did not see spaces for those fields to flourish in a program like the iSchool. 

With those caveats out ahead, 

## There is no market, and we know it



## There is enormous debt, and we know it

## There is not sufficient urgency or organizing


Professors resist the argument "maybe we shouldn't have an MA program" because it feels like a capitulation to the neoliberal university, proclaiming that an educational program without a clear market outcome is not valuable. Those concerns are valid. Such an argument _may in fact be_ a capitulation to the neoliberal university, or the neoliberal American economy. However, if many of our MA students are going into enormous debt in order to pursue our educational ideal, perhaps it becomes unethical to not capitulate, at least until we have a plan in place to mitigate those direct harms to our students. 